Testing, testing, one, two, three, four. And I'll
five, six, seven, eight. I guess it's working okay
now. Okay. This is Thursday, a sunny Thursday,
March 15 at 1205 Winding Road. And I have the
pleasure and honor of chatting with Dr. Donald.
Don Lewis. Don, Don Lewis, L-E-W-I-S. Don, to
begin with, introduce yourself to anyone who
might hear this tape or read the transcription.
Describe, give us a biographical sketch before
you got to A&M. Where'd you grow up? Family, go to
high school, college, and so forth. Well, I grew up
in Rotan, Texas. It's a small community out in West
Texas about 60 miles northwest of Abilene. The
high school was the Roten yellow hammers that's
somewhat unique and that and someone and I'm it
might have been you that told me the origin of the of
the someone told me the origin of that but I've
never seen a yellow hammer frankly oh which a bird
yes oh yes yes yes I know it's a bird but I I didn't see
any out there anyway um I was one of those
individuals that started at five and graduated a
year earlier. What did mom and dad do? Dad worked at
the National Gypsum Company. Rotan happens to be,
at that time, it was probably the world's largest
store of gypsum. There's an extremely large store
of gypsum in that area. So that part of the country,
or at least that small community, had the
fame of being a large gypsum place and near a very
large pool of oil. A lot of people in the small town
of Snyder got very wealthy almost overnight. We
unfortunately weren't one of those. So I went to
high school at Rotan and graduated in 1953. Then I
was actually offered a music scholarship to two
places, to Tarleton and to actually the
University of Texas. And I guess that came from the
fact that I was in the band and I had gone to all state
band and that sort of thing, which was smart.
Music has always been an avocation of mine and I
really enjoyed playing and have always enjoyed
music. But my first year I went to Tarleton
and then from there I went to the University of
Texas. and I didn't feel that I had time at least at
the University of Texas the symphony and the
various music activities demanded a lot of time
which I didn't feel that I had because my intention
was to go to medical school and at that time and
perhaps less so now than it was then getting into
medical school was very very competitive and so I
had to maintain you know a pretty good grade point
average in order to be in order for it to be a
realistic goal well I did go on through the paces
and I had many odd jobs one odd job involved
I played in a small combo. We used to sing and play at
various fraternities and made, you know, I have
gigs on the weekends. What did you play? Trombone.
And I sang, I sang, we, we, the group that were doing
this weren't using any music. We would listen to a
record and try to duplicate it as best we could to
duplicate the sound that they were having and I'm
not sure Whether we did or didn't, but anyway, we
had a lot of fun doing that. In fact, too much fun one
semester. So I stopped doing that and took a job.
Actually, I took a job at the Austin State
Hospital, which was a real good job and sort of in
tune with what my career goals were at that time. It
gave me room, board, and laundry. and $175 a month,
which was a lot of money at that time. So I worked
there for a while, and then I
had an opportunity to work in another, to go to
another place. I had state funding and that sort of
thing, and even had what, I believe it was called
Teacher's Retirement, but I wasn't there long
enough. I was there for about a year and a half. And
went to work for a place called Brown Schools,
which was a school for emotionally disturbed
kiddos. And not that that was necessarily my
career interest, but I thought it would be an
interesting job because I did kind of like to work
with youth anyway. And it was there that I met
Carol, Carol, my wife. and she was interested in
becoming a, ultimately she became a counselor,
but she was going to Texas Woman's University and I
was still at the University of Texas with the
objective of going to medical school at the
end of my, after graduation. and so we worked,
Carol and I worked together as counselors and
among other counselors at the Brown School and
then she went back to TWU and I was still at the
University of Texas and finally I finished and at
that time you know we were all subject to draft if we
weren't in school and so I had applied to medical
school and I didn't get in the first time. So I
wondered what I was gonna do. And then the draft
board was breathing down my neck saying that, you
know, you need to either be in school or we need to,
you know. So I signed up to go into the army and I
signed up as a medical laboratory specialist. Now
I was one of the few In those days, of course, it's
common these days for enlisted
people to have degrees and not be commissioned,
but it was very unusual during those days. So I went
in as a non-commissioned person, and during a
basic training, they did these various tests and
it just so happened that I had been a ham radio
operator when I was in high school and I knew Morse
code very well and I'd enlisted to be a medical
laboratory specialist but when they found that I
was proficient in Morse code they really tried to
push me to go into into the signal core in fact they
tried to push me to go into uh all the the secret
service and that sort of thing you know that they
want you to well I convinced them that I didn't want
to do that and so I did go and take medical training
and then during this time Carol and I were still
communicating and
I was going to be an instructor there at Sam Houston
Fort Sam Houston And because the commanding
officer wanted me to be, I was one of the few people
that had a degree. Well, my major was zoology, but I
had a lot of hours in microbiology and a lot of hours
in chemistry. I'm not sure whether this is the sort
of thing you want or not, but this is just a stream of
thought.
And I had pretty strong foundations in those
areas, so they wanted to keep me there at San
Antonio. And I thought, man, this will be great.
Carol can go ahead and finish up her degree, and
I'll be there in San Antonio, and we can... Well, it
just so happened that there was an E-5, a sergeant.
I was a private E-2 at that time. And... He wanted to
go to Germany because his wife was from Germany and
I wanted to stay there because my fiance was in
Texas and I thought this was going to be ideal.
Something happened, the orders got switched and
Sergeant, which I wasn't a sergeant, I was
private, Sergeant Donald Lewis was going to go to
the UCR medical lab and private I've forgotten
what the sergeant's name was now was to stay there
for instruction and he didn't have the training he
I don't think he had a college I don't think he had
any college training and so he really tried to talk
to the powers that be that so that he could go to
Germany and and and I really tried to talk to the
powers to be so that I could stay there but it didn't
work out that way so oh that was the biggest crisis
of our life And so we, I went, so we went on, I went on
over to Germany, not knowing really what I was, you
know, Carol and I were going to be apart for three
years and I'm not sure we'd be the same person, you
know, afterwards. So,
so we, so I did go on to Germany. And while there, I
met the, I was, I was with, with a great group of
people. One person who really had a lot of
influence on my training and on my future career,
Ken Dirks, he lives in this community,
incidentally. Spell Dirks. D-I-R-K-S. He was a
major at that time. Later on, I found that he became
a, you know after I'd gone and everything he became
a major general but he he was also a one of one of the I
don't know if this interim or what but he was a dean
here at the at the medical school here
but he was you know he and his family were great well
Carol graduated she she She took 21 hours a
semester and pushed through getting through and
so she, to kind of make a long story short, she met me
over in Germany and we lived on the economy. At that
time I wasn't eligible for housing on the post so we
lived on the economy and we lived off of my salary
for what we could, you know, what we could on the
economy. And because we both kind of had an
interest in you know, youth and child, you know,
child development and that sort of thing. Let's
see, seems like someone, my commanding officer,
not Ken, but my commanding officer asked if we
would stay with their kiddos for two weeks while
they went on annual leave. And so we did, and again,
to make a long story short, we stayed more in
people's houses doing that than, than anything
else. And we, you know, I stayed, I stayed in, in
generals and we stayed in general squatters and,
and things like that. And, and a lot of times before
they knew what we were doing, they, they were, you
know, what are you, private, what are you walking
over here for? So,
um, the, the experience at, and this was in
Landstuhl, spell that L-A-N-D-S-T-H-U-L
it was the USAR reference laboratory for Europe
and so I mean it was just like a college campus and as
far as I know it's still still very much that way
it's sort of the army reference laboratory for for
Europe so I got some experiences that I I don't
believe I could have gotten anywhere else I was
exposed to you know various techniques for cell
culture which was kind of new at that time was kind
of instrumental in in developing
immunofluorescence or fluorescence antibody
techniques for that lab at that time and let's see
we also there well this was during the this was in
1960 when the when the reserves were activated,
the army reserves were activated, and a number of
people were suddenly, their lives were just
suddenly turned around, so they suddenly showed
up over there in Germany, and they were going to be
there for a couple of three, at least a couple of
three months, and perhaps longer, because this
was the Berlin Wall crisis, the beginning of the
Berlin Wall crisis. And I'm assuming that these
experiences are adding to your uh health care yeah
my goal yeah whatever of some sort yeah and please
let me know if if this is not what you want because I
this again like I say this is just stream of
conscious now then you come back about when yeah um
I come back in uh 62. 62
I thought that I would go back and and I was kind of
fearful of jumping right back into a medical
school program, because I was fairly confident I
wouldn't have had much problem getting in,
particularly with my background. And so I decided
I'd pursue a degree program, but I decided that it
would probably be smarter for me to go to a place
where I wouldn't have to work quite as hard for a
graduate degree as the University of Texas might
be. did a master's degree at Southwest Texas,
which proved to be a very good thing. I was doing
some things that were kind of cutting edge from my
Army experience. I was working with
Bacteriophage and Salmonella. and what that does
is at that time I was working with mapping genes
with bacteriophage which is really pretty far
advanced and the only reason why it wasn't because
I was so clever but it was because I had been exposed
to some of that type of material in the in the army so
and my my thesis has to do with with the
transduction in salmonella and that sort of thing
so then after getting that finished I thought well
I think I'm ready to so I went on made it made the
application for for medical school I really
preferred to stay here in Texas. And let's see,
Texas Tech didn't have a school at that time. I
believe there were two schools, Southwest Texas
and Galveston. And so I applied to those two
schools, and I was called for an interview. And I
was called for an interview. On one of the
interviews, I went up to Dallas for the interview.
And our first son had came along at that time. which
and we were still in financial straits we stayed in
financial straits for most of most even even for a
short short period of time even while I was a
faculty member here so Donald our oldest son was
born at that time and we were somewhat in debt from
our from my school days there in in southwest Texas
and so I was coming back from from Dallas and uh I was
gonna I was on my way to the farm, Carol's parents
farm in Thorndale and and I stopped at uh I happened
to stop here in College Station because that
happened to be one route by which I could get to
Thorndale and there's a as we mentioned the other
day there's a service there was a service station a
Sinclair service station where Cafe XL is now and
uh I was just kind of talking. I just said, you know,
I wish, what do they have here on this campus? And we
got to, me and one of the guys was visiting there,
and it just so happened that there was a student
there that said, you know, I've heard that they've
got some assistantships out at the vet school.
Well, veterinary medicine was the furthest thing
from my mind. But I thought, well, you know, I could
get into a holding pattern at least, and maybe we
could get out of this financial strait that we're
in. And so I went out and talked to, actually,
Leland. Leland Grumbles. Leland Grumbles and
Charlie Hall, the other Charlie Hall. And they
said, yeah, we'd like for you to consider coming
here. I said, well, I've got a master's degree. I'm
not interested in pursuing. Well, we'd like for
you to come here. We didn't want you to come here. We
would like for you to pursue a Ph.D. And this is
Veterinary Microbiology? Veterinary
Microbiology. And when is this? This is 66.
No, no, 64. Fall of 64? Mm-hmm. Okay. Well,
actually summer. I mean, getting ready for the
fall. Yeah. Mm-hmm. So I came on board. I came and
started, you know, as a graduate student. What did
they offer you in terms of compensation and
assignments? Well, I believe the amount was, it
seemed like it was about $8,000 or $10,000. I mean,
at that time, and to me, that was a fantastic
amount. And this was for a 12-month task? Yes,
uh-huh. What were your duties? Well, primarily to
pursue graduate work, but to help in the
instruction in microbiology, because I had a
pretty strong background, I mean, you know, in
microbiology. Describe your first duties. Well,
we had students the vet students, because there
wasn't a very big graduate program at that time. So
I was to lecture to the vet students and help in the
labs. What course or courses? Microbiology. What
year for them? It was their second year. They were
second year students at that time. Describe the
students at that time. Well, Let's see, I'm trying
to think of some of the students I knew. I don't know
whether you want me to use names or not. You use
names wherever it would help. Yeah, I don't think I
will use names, but there were a couple of three
students that had gone to Southwest Texas while I
was a graduate student. and they were in vet school
at that time and so they were the students were I
think consistently the students the vet students
have been certainly cut above the usual
undergraduates
these were all male all male all male all male yes no
no females at that as far as I know there weren't any
and no minority no black none whatsoever okay
right and in terms of their background as far as you
recall where did they come from were they urban
kids or no there was a good mix they were they were no
there wasn't a good they were primarily rural they
were rural primarily rural the the urban I suspect
that most of the kiddos that were urban there were a
lot of people that that went that went to that were
planning to go to medical school that came to
veterinary school, I think, as a secondary
option. That's the sense that I had from, I mean, a
fairly significant number of people that were
just wanting to be in some sort of health care. What
kind of orientation or prep or training or
anything did they give you before you walked? Oh,
boy, I walked in cold. walked in cold and I was not a
you know I was kind of a I've never been one to be you
know comfortable unless I'm singing or something
like that lecturing but I soon felt like I was in my
element And what year in vet school were these
students? Second year. Second year. I believe
they were second. Yeah, they were second year. And
some of them were pretty challenging. They would
challenge me, but I feel like I was up to the task
because I had practical experience in dealing
with them. About what size were the sections you
were teaching and the number? Let's see. Oh, gee.
It's primarily in the labs. Okay.
So would this be a dozen or so? No, no, there were
about 40 or 50. The labs were arranged so that there
were two large laboratories and then we kind of put
together the media and explained how to interpret
the reactions and you know how to streak plates and
how to isolate the organisms and and that sort of
thing now were you doing this alone or was there
someone else no there was someone else there was uh
no as a matter of fact well no there were some other
there were some others there were actually um
there was a person um i'll use his name jim grimes He
had had experience with the Texas Department of
Public Health and a fellow by the name of Gordon
Welch who had actually gone to medical school for
three years and I never did know why he dropped out
but he came back to get a PhD and myself
and there was one other person who had graduated
about four years earlier as a veterinarian, and he
was coming back to do graduate work. I think we four
were the first, if not the first, among the first of
the people that were pursuing, you know, on the
Ph.D. type program. Now, who was the department
head and who was directing this activity? Leland
Grumbles was the department head, a fellow by the
name of Paul Youngerman. Y-O-U-N? No, it's
J-U-N-G-E-R. And I think he might be another
source of stories. Now, he has a lot of stories,
some of which are fabrications, I'm sure, because
he was a great story spinner. But Youngerman was in
charge of microbiology. Grumbles was the
department head. Archie Flowers.
was sort of in charge of, had some
responsibilities in the lab. But they primarily
turned it over to us because those
guys, Jargeman and, really had never worked in a
laboratory situation. And here, I had worked for
three years in an army, you know, medical
laboratory, reference medical laboratory
situation. And Jim Grimes had worked in the public
health department in Austin. And Jim was about 30,
35 at the time. I was the youngest one. I was about 28
or 29, I think. And Gordon was, he had been a medical
student, but he, as I say, I never really knew why he
didn't, didn't finish but he came back and he was he
had had some experience the point is that that
really we were probably better prepared to to do
the laboratory than than some of the people that
were supposed to be doing it really did anybody sit
down with y'all and give you any guidelines any
directions uh on an ad hoc basis and how what were
some of their what was some of their advice their
guidance well um Most of the times they would say,
and let's see,
they would say, don't be too wordy, make it short
and succinct and follow these guidelines, follow
this, this that we've, they had outlined some
materials. And don't tolerate any cheating.
And if you, well, and if you encounter any
problems, let us know. Describe a tip for you.
Describe a typical work day. As a graduate
student. At that time. What time did you get to the
campus, and what did you do for how long? Oh, this
was kind of an exciting time for me. So I would get to
work. I would usually get to work about 7.30 or so,
maybe even earlier. And the first year that I was
there, I was taking, I guess, a relatively heavy
load. I was taking biochemistry,
radiation biology. So I would do some studying at
first. But I was so glad to be doing some real,
quote, quote unquote real research, I would
review some of the material that I'd gotten. The
medical sciences library was right down the way
from where my office was. So I would spend some time
in the medical, and usually there were people
there beginning at about 7 o'clock. And so
sometimes I'd go down there and have a chance to
look over some materials. And then I'd go to class,
say, Didn't have too many 8 o'clock classes, so I'd
go to class about 9 o'clock. I had Mac Prescott.
Maybe I shouldn't be using that. No, no, don't. No,
dude. Describe Professor Prescott as a graduate
instructor. He was an outstanding individual.
Truly outstanding. And I bet he took everything
seriously. Very seriously. You bet. In fact...
This was a graduate level, a graduate level
biochemistry course. And most, I didn't know that
at the time, but most graduate courses, it's just
sort of, you automatically make a B or better.
There were lots of people in his class that didn't
pass. I'm not surprised. He pressed very hard, but
he was just a very interesting, well, It was very
structured, but very,
I enjoyed his class very much, but I was one of the
few that did. I
found him to be easy to converse with outside of
class. In fact, I would often visit with him about
one thing or another. One thing that I was
particularly interested in and the problem that I
was working on, I hadn't zeroed in on a particular
problem, but I was interested in the use of
electrophoretic
procedures.